At that, as a junior faculty member, you were
expecting to stay in higher education. You
weren't planning to... There was not much
opportunity outside of educational
institutions for them to follow, because most of
that was done at educational institutions.
there are a lot of commercial laboratories that do
research even now do that a lot of it and there are
some contract laboratories and they they do this.
Now when did you first remember getting
acquainted with Alvin Price? Alvin Price was an
assistant
professor in anatomy. Of course, he graduated
after I left, and it was only after I came back here
that I met him. But even in anatomy, my
relationships were with, at that time then, were
with John Milliff. And I guess when he became dean,
I became cognizant that he was there. When did he
become dean? I could look that up for you. Because I
think he was dean when I got here in 59.
That could be. You
better pray quickly, honey, so he doesn't hear
you. No, no, that's all right. No. I don't remember
either one. But I said, now he's one that would be a
wonderful person to interview. Oh, see, that's
what I regret, yes. Because he could have given you
lots of information. Now, is he bedridden
totally? No, he sits up in a chair. Okay. But he
doesn't. That's what I understand. Al
Price became dean in 1957 after Armistead
departed. Do you recall that you all felt good
about his appointment as dean? Very much so.
Describe his style of leadership.
was mature for his age, in my opinion. And of
course, I think part of that, he had, and I think
Earl Rutter picked him. And Al had been an infantry
officer in World War II, Colonel. And he had some of
that value, but he had a very congenial way of
working with you. and letting you know he wanted
something done. He said, here's your job, let's
see it done. And I remember one time I had an animal
laboratory above his office and the students
would get too much water down there and it would
come through on him and he got a hold of me and he
says, you stop that. If you don't, I'm going to take
care of it.
But he was very, as you say, a very capable manager
and a leader. And so you all respected him highly? I
did, yes. And I think everybody did. When did the
vet school move west of the tracks? Was it about the
time he became dean? 1958, I
believe. Okay. 58, 57 or 8. Did you faculty members
get to have any part in planning the new
facilities? Yes. I got together the information
department, and I had the incinerator and what
they just found out, a duct made 5 billion dollars
to build a new one. Then we designed the whole
second floor of the medical
building, the other one for the science. I thought
we designed the whole second floor of that for our
laboratories and operations. And of course, we
had the architect change some of our design. Were
you all pleased with those facilities? Oh, very
much so. others were jealous of them and we were
just fortunate that we needed space. We had a very
strong program at that time. Would nationally the
program in pathology was becoming known? Very
much so. Yeah, I think we were one of the top
programs. Who were the other among the top
programs at that time? Cornell had historically
has had an excellent program. And Washington
State at that time had a strong program for
research. And
Michigan also had a good, strong program. The
others I think were respectable, but I thought we
had probably one of the better ones we had. When I,
my last year I think we had 15 or 16 Ph.D. students
when veterinary medicine was pretty strong,
surely. Now, when you all first moved over there,
late 50s, what were the other strong programs in
veterinary medicine other than pathology? I
think microbiology had a strong program. They had
not developed their Ph.D. program. And as I
remember, we were about the only one that had
anything of any strength at that time. Those all
came on later. Who were the most highly respected
faculty members in the other departments?
You're talking about other than department
heads? Yeah. Who would have been known
nationally? Oh, I see what you mean. Well, the
people in microbiology were known primarily for
their disease programs. Who were they? Charles
Hall, and there were others that were through
there, but those two name was there, I think. John
Dell played before that. John Leland succeeded
him after he died. And
what about any of the other departments,
nationally known scholars?
Well, Millet, honey, from anatomy was pretty well
known, wasn't he? Millet was known, but he was
known as a teacher, as a pathologist. But in our
practice, he was a grandfathered into the
American College of Endopathy. But they didn't
have a graduate program.
as you look back now on the veterinary medicine
medical curriculum at that time were there any
things that were getting too much attention and
were there any topics getting too little
attention in the veterinary curriculum at that
time as we know that's a matter of opinion and uh i
felt uh very strongly Yes, I do, even in primary
education today, that there are certain things
that are most important, reading and writing.
Okay. And in medicine, I think that the anatomy,
pathology, and physiology are the foundations.
Okay. Which are on basis for everything else. And I
think that when you decide what you're going to
study, both diseases and rat diseases and and do
all these, you divide the person's attention,
which they cannot do. However, the human mind has
strengths that can overcome this. I think, yes, I
think that the students are overwhelmed. And some
of the Canadian schools recognize this, and they
were strong in basics. And in fact, they were
stronger in basics in a lot of their clinical
efforts were not, well they figured they could
learn that. That's an applications type thing.
What that's again is a matter of opinion. If you're
teaching public health, and veterinarians are
very heavy now in public health, and advisories
and things like that, that person is going to say
well that's important. in the late 50s early 60s
among the students in veterinary medicine how
many of them hope to be in large animal what
percentage or small animal what was the breakdown
then
well i think in those days uh there i i would
hesitate to say i would say at least 50 50. okay now
they're there i i think this could be documented
But I don't have those pictures. Were there many
who were looking primarily toward public health
in that era? Not many, no. A lot of them got into
public health because if they had a service
obligation, they would go into veterinary
training programs and services would send them to
public health schools. A lot of them went to Tulane
or places like that. and out of the service because
the service wouldn't allow them to do those
things. You became department head when? 1960.
1960. All right. As you become department head,
what did you find were the primary
responsibilities of being a department head?
Well, it was the direction of the program and
basically is defining people to do the work. and
that was a problem at that time because when Hilton
left
there was not a heavy component of strong
pathology there. I mean the people that had
advanced training And the level that I was
concerned that it should have been a university
level for people to teach others. How many PhDs
were in the department then? You were the only one?
And the faculty was how many?
I think four or five. And did Dean Price, when he
appointed you, did he give you any instructions,
any guidance, any directions?
I don't remember that he dictated anything.
He said, he expressed that he wanted to see it
develop, and he said, can I help? And I think he
respected the program and the needs, and
I don't remember anything Now you served how many
years? 17.
As you were starting out, did you turn to any of the
other department heads for advice?
Don't remember any of them doing so. I've had
discussions, but if you know men, men will get
information by not asking us what should I do. Who
became your closest friends? One of the closest
relationships was where there was a parallel,
say, a friendship because we hunted together. It
was J.D. McCready. And part of that I saw myself
because I was trying to develop research
programs. And the big thing then was
collaborative, which works fine to a certain
extent. But some people don't want to
collaborate. A lot of them look at a pathologist
being like, can you read this slide for me and tell
me what it is and I'll report it. And some of that is
that, but there are others that work with us. So we
would seek out those kinds of things and try to work
them out. Make believe that I was not acquainted
with this man McCready. Describe him.
What was his specialty, and what was his normal
operating procedure?
He was a very extroverted person. And as I see him,
and
very capable of being a good politician, and
friendly to most anybody. And he had a lot of good
contacts because of his association with the
medical school at Baylor. And his department?
Physiology. He was supposed to be in physiology.
And he had some very good people with him. And he had
a very large program because they taught a lot of
students. Was he department head when you became
department head? No. When
I became department head, I was a junior person,
and I perceived that I was thought to be so. Did you
department heads meet regularly with Dean Price?
Yes, he had department meetings. Describe one of
those. What was a typical meeting like?
Well, I don't know how to say that. They would, he
would basically have an agenda. He would call, you
know, have a meeting to order and he would present
things to be looked at and he would start a
discussion. And from that, ordinarily, he would
make a decision. Occasionally, he would ask for a
vote, which I thought was not a very smart thing to
do. That's just a bunch of opinions. Was he always
bound by the majority vote? No, I don't think so, in
my opinion. I don't think he was. I think he did his
own, you know, made up his own mind. Yeah, he was
pretty smart, too. But did you ever feel that it was
to your disadvantage not to be candid with him? I
don't think I'd not want to be candid with him.
That's what I thought. That's the answer I
thought.
He didn't mind telling me what he thought, but he
was also always very polite. It's just amazing.
Among
the other department heads, who were your
favorite associates?
I would say that there were not any such thing
except the Leland drum, which now went back a long
ways. He and I were reared that five miles each
time. And among the department heads, seven,
eight? I think it was seven most of the time.
And when you became a department head, was there
anyone who was the senior senior? that had been
there a long, long time? Well, of course, Pat Burns
had been there longer than anybody. Okay. But Pat
Burns was a very quiet individual and soft-spoken
and not outspoken. Dick Turk was probably the most
outgoing and you might say influential type of
person because of his He let his opinion be known.
As
department head, what was your style within your
department? Did you have faculty meetings
regularly? We had faculty meetings, and we would
discuss things, and seldom did I ask for a vote. I
asked for opinions. Because I found that if you ask
somebody's opinion and you don't respect it, then
you begin to erode your support. And you have to
maintain your support for them by individual
discussions. That's my opinion. I guess I'm old
school. Do you remember any examples of where your
opinion and what you thought was the majority of
the department's opinion were different? Can you
think of any?
Nothing comes to mind right now. What were some of
the most important decisions that you and the
department made during all the years you were
department head?
That's very hard to answer. We had a program where
I tried to get over to each individual faculty
member, do your best, develop something, become
known, remember that you, the department's going
to be made up with you and your colleagues, and his
reputation will be based on the community, and
then I'll support, I'll try to help you. I had to
make decisions that they didn't like,
reassigning the laboratories and things like
that. I had one in tears one time, but he's now a dean
of the Air Corps in Connecticut, I believe it is.
And those things like that, I guess that
I was the decision-maker.
And were you the key person in selecting new
faculty for the department? Yes. Who are some of
the faculty you're proud that you hire?
Well, Ken Pierce was a very capable individual.
Make believe I don't know him, and tell me about
him.
a very serious, quiet, no funny business type of
person that is very professional.
He...
I would like people in categories and several of
the faculty that I could put into categories. Some
of the people are so introverted that they never
get anything done. So many people are so
extroverted they never get anything done. and the
people that make progress are in between. Ken was
just a little bit on the middle, below the middle.
He was more introverted, but he was very safe.
Quality of his work was so good. Where did you first
kind of identify him? Where did you? Well, in the
days when Ken came, we were trying to build a power.
And he was one of the first that came in. He had been
teaching on anatomy. And he'd gone out and said he
needed to do some practice. So he went out and he
wanted to come back. So I interviewed him for an
opportunity in pathology. Did he contact you or
you contact him? I don't remember exactly how that
came. I think I did not know without his. his
innocent pathology. I think, basically, it may be
that Hilton had somewhere had some contact with
him. Because wouldn't he have been among the first
faculty you hired? Yes. He would have been one of
the strengths. Did he do his doctoral degree here?
Yes. With you? Yes. I was his major professor. You
were his chairman? I'll tell you a story that I
don't really know. But I did him wrong. You don't
want it on tape? No. Let's turn this back on now. A
few things about leadership. You want people to
want to do what you want done. And this is the
essence of it. And this is what's happening in this
area that you're talking about. People are going
out with joyous things. And that's the thing where
the big congregations are very developing.
that's what they're doing. They're not depending
on, you ought to do this. That's right. Kind of the
thing of the old groups. How did you encourage that
philosophy in the department? Well, we had a,
there is a strong, there was a strong spirit of code
in the department, and we felt like we And I always
told them that you should know as much about
veterinary medicine and diseases as anybody,
even including the clinicians, except that you
don't have to mess with the clients. And you are
supposed to be academically, or you're supposed
to have the answers to know and be able to solve
problems. And people should come to you and you
should be prepared that he would come to you for
answers, which people want to do, a pathologist.
They say, well, here, I've got a problem. Help me.
Tell me about it. And we developed a very strong
disparity core. And there is a very strong
certifying group of American College of
Endocrine Pathologists. And people know that
they need to aspire
to pass their exams. and the county would have been
dependent upon each other to learn. And we were
proud of our department, and I'm a little
concerned that that's been hurt a little bit by the
amalgamation of the groups and taken out of the
way. For example, they no longer have parties
together
as individuals, and people want to be identified.
They, like the cadets, their companies are the
sole, their sole arrangement. And then... All
right, as department head, did you all have social
events as a department? We'd have people... Quite
a few. Ken continued that at some. And later others
came in that dropped in. i think it is hurt a while
ago we were talking and you were saying ken you were
proud to have brought him here are there some
others that you want to mention well there's one
right now that is jewel and that's gary adams gary
adams and he told me yesterday he's been he's been
over promotion but he doesn't know where he wants
to accept did you now did you bring him here He was my
graduate student. Oh, your graduate student,
okay. And then he stayed. And he stayed, yeah.
During your time as department head, were there
any major research efforts in which the
department was involved that you're proud to
claim that they all were part of it? We were
participating in a lot of research programs. And
we had our own, and each individual had programs
that many of them were sponsored by the National
Institutes of Health. I had, I was program
director of a public health, a U.S. public health,
National Institutes of Health Training and
Medical Pathology, which was well respected. And
that went for 10 years until we finally phased
those programs out. We did, research on quite a few
things and try to solve problems. The some others
in collaboration with others, I tell told
somebody, and now in my age in my position, I tell
them if you want to see anything, the impact, the
impact of our research, I said you go to now to
Lexington, Kentucky, you'll see that the all the
board fences are painted black. And the essence of
that was the research that I did to find that the
young foals were licking the fences and getting
zinc from that. From the white paint. From the
white paint. And that inhibited the absorption of
copper, which they were getting very little from
milk to start with. And the joints fell apart.
peeled off, the carcass peeled off. Did that
affect the thoroughbred horses more than any
other breeds? Mainly because thoroughbred
horses were the horses that were kept in the fancy
fences. Oh, in the fancy fences. The Kleberg
Foundation funded this.
Bubba Wattuck told me not too long ago, he said,
that building ought to be named for you She said,
they sponsored that because of your work. And so I
feel good about that, and we did. Other examples
like that? We worked on... What was that grass
business, honey? We worked on, yeah, there's a
photosynthesization that occurs with panicum
grass. It's just planted commercially, I mean,
intentionally. particularly for sheep, they're
grazing that. And they develop this, eat this
panicament. Sometimes they do, sometimes they
don't. But the young lambs particularly develop
photosensitization, which really results from
their liver being
damaged by crystals of this saponin. The saponin
is a common component of plants.
This stuff precipitates in there, and it has a
chemical structure very similar to cholesterol.
And the liver, because it is an analog of
cholesterol, the liver handles it to a certain
point, and then it precipitates in the bile ducts.
And that plugs them up, and then they retain the
porphyrins, which come from plants also,
circulates through the blood, and into the skin,
and the sun gets on that and activates it. and it
caused their skin to slow. And we worked that out to
find out why this particular plant is. Of course,
nothing has happened from that other than they
could either plant the stuff or not plant it. There
was a chance for them to, if they wanted, if it was
important enough that somebody could take the
plant and develop some that had less saponins or do
find out when sheep would be more successful.
There are things like that that we did, and that is
to work on identifying mycotic diseases of horses
particularly and others that are unique
diseases. Did y'all ever do anything...